Brett Sweezey GEOG 676 E-Portfolio: Master Well Database
======

Industry Problem: There are discrepancies between physical oil and gas well locations which arise from the accumulation of data from various online databases. The manner in which geographical location is collected and recorded can differ between private inudustries and local and federal government organizations. Variation in data may be the result of inaccurate or old data sets and the use of incorect coordinate systems that are projected onto ArcGIS maps. 

Project Proposal and Goal
------
This project will be designed to create a software tool that will combine the location data from various industry oil well databases that may include similar, yet conflicting geographical information. This tool will: 1) Include database information from CAD, Decision Space Geographics, Petrel, OpenWells, COMPASS, and state regulatory databases. 2) Calculate the inverses between oil well locations from imported databases and create a new Master Well location database with the most accurate and updated trending position 3) Determine whether the coordinates within each database are in the coordinate systems NAD83 or NAD 27 4) Develop a tool that allows the end user to select the master well location through different aerial images.

Languages, Software, and Database Construction
------
The proposed tool will be developed through the use of the coding language Python, due to its versatility, ease of use, and accessibility compared to other commonly used langauges. The benefit of using Python will allow the end users with limited coding experience to have an increased likelihood of understanding and customizing the proposed software (if they find that necessary). One benefit of using Python for this tool is the seemless transition of Python code with ArcGIS through the ArcPy package established by ESRI. In order for the end user to have full access and integration of the proposed tool, it is recommended that they have access to Python, Visual Studio Code, GitHub, Git Extensions, ArcGIS Pro, and ArcPy.

### _Visual Studio Code_
Visual Studio Code (VSC) is an open-source code editor designed for writing and debugging modern web and cloud applications. VSC will be useful due to the similarities outlined with Python listed above (versatility, ease of use, accessibility) and it is free on all major computing platorms. Python can be easiliy integrated into VSC through installing the 'Python' package which will ease the production of the coding process as well as use a simple user interface (UI) which is easily understandable for the end user. 

### _GitHub_
GitHub allows users to upload and store data through respositories that can be stored online and be made available publicly or to a select group of individuals. The propsed Master Well Dataset will be stored in an online private repository to minimize the likelihood of end users manipulating and changing the final product. The finalized well database can be distributed through trusted users with direct access to this repository. If sucessful, a separate additional repository with the Master Well Database may be created to allow public access for modification and edits to improve the end user's experience within the tool's script. These repositories will include the well location databases from the data sources taken from the various industries used to develop the Master Well Database.

### _Git Extensions_
Git Extensions is a standalone UI tool specifically designed for managing Git respositories which can be access from multiple platform and records the history of files that have been uploaded or removed. This software is designed to overcome the complications for users with limited coding experience pushing their Python code from VSC to their Github repository. Git Extensions can be seamless integrated with VSC, Python, and ArcPy to accurately and rapidly update a repository with the click of a single button.

### _ArcGIS Pro_
ArcGIS Pro is an advanced spatial mapping software developed by ESRI which has the capacity to create, view, and edit maps with the benefit of integrating powerful spatial analysis statistics. ArcGIS Pro is an industry standard when dealing with complex spatial structures and tackling geolocation problems like the one this tool was proposed for. ArcGIS can work seamlessly with Python through the ArcPy package which will allow the end user to view the output and results from this tool.

### _ArcPy_
ArcPy is a Python package that allows for seamless integration of Python code within ArcGIS Pro and allows for GIS functions to be written and carried out in the Python language without the requirement of opening ArcGIS software. ArcPy will be necessary for Python code written in VSC to be interpretted and run without complications with the ArcGIS Pro infrastructure. 

### __Master Well Location Database__
The finalized Master Well Database will be composed of input and output files from the proposed software tool. End users will have access to the original input source, well location databases, as well as the output data including the steps used to produce the finalized output for our proposed tool. Users will have access to the Python code used to construct the Master Well Database in addition to instructions including a flowchart on how data was gathered, constructed, and analyzed to allow users to replicate these processes.

### __Industry Well Databases__
To streamline the collection of data for the end user, databases used for this project (CAD, Decision Space Geographics, Petrel, OpenWells, COMPASS, and state regulatory databases) will be gathered within a local repository with public access. These specific databases were chosen due to their common use within the oil and gas industry. Metadata regarding how information was collected and processed will be included within this repository. Additionally, it is likely that additional databases may be added to our Master Well Database in the future to increase location accuracy and account for the variation in geolocation data across as many databases as possible. 

Project Outline
------
1. The script for the Master Wells Database will be written using the Python coding language integrated with VSC and the ArcPy package. Once this is created, the original code will be uploaded to a private repository on Github which will be accessible to trusted individuals. The software tool will be uploaded to a public repository which can be created and accessed using the techniques applied for [Lab 1](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/tree/main/Lab_01).

2. The well geolocation information from each individal database will be compared against each other to estimate how accurate the well geolocations are in comparison to each other. Scripts (such as those developed in [Lab 2](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/blob/main/Lab_02/lab02_python_script.py) will be developed in Python which will determine the difference in longitude and latitude (X and Y coordinates) measurements and place this updated information into the database which a matching field ID. This script will allows users to determine the inaccuracy of well locations within certain regions for every database. 

3. The various data sources used to supply well location information for this project (CAD, Decision Sapce Geographics, Petrel, OpenWells, COMPASS, and state regulatory databases) will be placed online into a public repository to allow the end user easier access to this information. Python scripts will be developed for user's to easily access information from each individual data base which will open the file, read the contents, and create variables which will be used for future actions. This will create a more streamlined method for end users to visualize the information that will be placed within the Master Well Database and examples of these scripts can be found in [Lab 3](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/blob/main/Lab_03/lab03_python_shape.py)

4. Information regarding the accuracy of well location coordinates from the various databases will be placed within our Master Well Location database. Python script will be created to write files to the Master Well Location geodatabase seen in this scripting exercise [Lab 4](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/blob/main/Lab_04/lab04_code.py)

5. Variation in the geolocation information of physical well location may be the result of different projection systems (NAD83 or NAD 27). A solution to this problem is by creating a buffer around the X and Y well coordinates to estimate the projected coordinate system. Once the projected coordinate system is identified, reprojections of the coordinates can be make to the original source files which can be viewed in the ArcGIS Pro program. Python script will be developed to identify and set buffer radii which was used in [Lab 5](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/tree/main/Lab_05)

6. A graduated color map will be used to visualize the confidence interval of the well locations between the various online databases. Color will follow a traditional "stop light" color scheme, with wells in red representing incorrect or farther away from the estimated accurate location, yellow representing wells that are nearby which distance some error, and green with well locations that are expected to be accurate. Python code simlar to the script developed in [Lab 6](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/blob/main/Lab_06/Maptool_Sweezey.py) will be used to create a map for visual represenation that then end user can interact with inside the ArcGIS Pro program. Future code can involve the inclusion of a legend to aid users with readability. 

7. The final step will involve ground truthing the well location information obtained from the buffer and graduated color map analyses. The end user will use multiband satellite analysis (which will include natural colors - red, blue, and green, and near infrared) which will be combined into a composite raster band to create a high resolution image of the surface of the earth. The composite raster can be projected onto a map with the well geolocation data to qualitatively estimate the physical well locations with the physical features on the raster which would indicate proper well location. Python script will be developed, similar to the exercise from [Lab 7](https://github.com/bsweezey-tamu/GEOG-676-Spring23/blob/main/Lab_07/lab7_sweezey.py), to combine satellite band images taken from USGS, create a composite band raster, and project this raster within ArcGIS Pro. 

Project Implementation and Benefits
------
  * The benefits of developing this tool will be the ease of accessibility for individuals and organizations across multiple platforms that would benefit from estimating the exact location of oil well geolocations for personal or public use.
  * If this tool is successful, a copy of the script for this tool will be placed into a public repository to allow end users to edit, make adjustments, or provide feedback to allow for more a more efficient and streamlined process. Substantial beneficial updates from ends users can be further evaluated in the future to implement changes into the source code which will create a more effective tool overall, save time and resources, and mitigate any future problems associated with incorrect positing information in the future. 
  * The flexibility of this tool will allow end users to access this tool through a varity of programs including python, VSC, and ArcGIS Pro. Due to the seamless integration of ArcPy by ESRI - the process of using these tools can be done without ever opening ArcGIS Pro. Maps that are produced within Python can be visually inspected through ArcGIS Pro and will be interactable with the end user.
  * Online data sources with well geolocation data will be always available to the end user. At any time the user can easily place this data into Python or ArcGIS Pro and convert the projection coordinates to their appropriate projection while determining which well sites may be accurate or inaccurate for their needs.
  * Updated script from the public that changes the tool interface will inevitably break and/or cause error for the end user. We plan to regularly check on the implementation of new scripts, especially before implemented major updates to improve upon the tool. Within the public respository, there will be a section dedicated that will allow users to provide feedback regarding any errors or changes that were made to the tool's script. When the tool is changed, updates will be implemented and posted as patch notes within the same public repository.

Conclusion
======
The Master Well Database tool proposed here will allow end users within the industry to experience a seamless experience when interfacing with a common problem (well location discrepancy). The purpose of creating this wireframe is to explain the purpose of creating the tool, outlining the creation process, the programs necessary to access and run the tool, and how this tool will be implemented and maintained in the future. This tool was designed and will be benefical to individuals, companies, and stakeholders in the oil and gas industry. 
